#separator:Pipe
#html:false
#notetype:Basic
#deck:ML::EDA and Profiling
#tags column:3
#columns:Front|Back|Tags
What does standard deviation measure?|Average distance of observations from the mean, expressed in the original units. Example: an SD of 3.9 means nothing until you know whether the mean is 12 or 12000.|spread
Why can standard deviation not be called high or low on its own?|It carries the units and scale of the variable, so it is only interpretable against the mean. Example: SD 260 on a payment averaging 419 is large, the same SD on an income averaging 70000 is trivial.|spread
What is the coefficient of variation?|Standard deviation divided by the mean, giving a unitless measure of relative spread. Example: it lets you compare dispersion between variables measured in different units.|spread
What are the rough coefficient of variation bands?|Below 0.1 is tight, 0.1 to 0.3 is moderate, above 0.3 is high relative spread. Example: a CV of 0.62 means the spread is roughly two thirds the size of the average value.|spread
What is variance?|The square of the standard deviation, expressed in squared units. Example: a calculation stepping stone rather than something you interpret directly.|spread
Why is standard deviation sensitive to outliers?|Each deviation is squared before averaging, so distant points contribute disproportionately. Example: a point ten times further from the mean contributes a hundred times more.|spread
What is the median absolute deviation?|The median of the absolute distances from the median, a spread measure robust to outliers. Example: extreme values barely move it because every step uses a median.|robust
What is the expected relationship between MAD and standard deviation?|For roughly normal data, SD is about 1.48 times MAD. Example: a MAD of 20000 implies an SD near 29600, so an actual SD of 66000 signals heavy tails.|robust
How do you use the gap between SD and MAD as a diagnostic?|Compare the actual SD against 1.48 times MAD; a much larger actual SD means a few extremes are inflating it. Example: it separates "a handful of impossible values" from "genuinely wide data".|robust
Can two variables share a coefficient of variation and look nothing alike?|Yes. A tight cluster plus a few extremes can match the CV of evenly dispersed data. Example: always read the histogram, never the dispersion number alone.|shape
What does a low-spread variable look like on a histogram?|A tall narrow peak with most mass close to the centre and short tails. Example: values concentrated in a few bins.|shape
What does a high-spread variable look like on a histogram?|Shorter, wider bars across a broad range, often with long tails. Example: a flatter hump, or a peak on one side trailing away.|shape
What does a mean above the median indicate?|Right skew: a tail of large values pulling the mean above the middle observation. Example: mean 419 against median 347.|shape
What is skewness?|A measure of distributional asymmetry, zero for symmetric data. Example: ordinary right-skewed variables sit near 1 to 3, while 45 indicates a handful of absurd records.|shape
What is kurtosis?|A measure of tail weight, extremely sensitive to far-out observations. Example: kurtosis in the thousands almost always means impossible values rather than a genuinely fat-tailed process.|shape
Why do robust and moment-based statistics disagree under contamination?|Medians ignore a few extremes while means, skewness and kurtosis magnify them. Example: MAD stays calm while kurtosis explodes, which localises the problem to the tail.|robust
Why can a histogram look empty except for a single bar?|One extreme value stretches the axis and compresses all real data into the first bin. Example: a maximum of 9 million when 95 percent of rows sit under 150000.|shape
How do you make a histogram readable when one outlier dominates the axis?|Plot on a log scale, or cap the axis at a high percentile. Example: view up to the 99th percentile to see the real shape.|shape
What is digit preference, or heaping?|Human-chosen values clustering on round numbers, making a histogram spiky rather than smooth. Example: requested amounts piling up at 5000, 10000 and 15000.|shape
What causes a pile-up at the extreme edge of a distribution?|A policy or system limit that many subjects hit exactly. Example: a spike at the maximum permitted amount because applicants request the cap.|shape
Why do spikes in an input often disappear in a derived variable?|A second freely varying input smears each spike across a range of output values. Example: one fixed amount combined with rates from 6 to 28 percent spreads into a wide band of payments.|features
What does a derived feature imply about its inputs?|It is a deterministic function of them, so it is collinear with them by construction. Example: a monthly payment computed from amount, rate and term carries no independent information.|features
Why does a linearly derived variable inherit the skew of its source?|Scaling changes the units but not the relative spread or asymmetry. Example: dividing an amount across a fixed term shrinks the numbers while leaving CV and skewness almost unchanged.|shape
Why can identical displayed inputs produce different derived values?|Stored precision exceeds displayed precision. Example: two rows both showing 6.00 percent may differ in the third decimal, changing the computed payment by a few units.|quality
Why prefer a normalised ratio over a raw amount?|Ratios are comparable across subjects while raw amounts are not. Example: a balance of 5000 means something very different against a 6000 limit than against a 50000 limit.|features
What is a banded, or interval-reported, value?|A quantity supplied as a range rather than a point. Example: a score given as a low and a high bound, with the true value somewhere between.|features
How is a date column usually turned into a feature?|As a duration from that date to the decision moment, not as the raw date. Example: the opening date of the oldest account becomes length of history.|features
What is typical of count features?|Heavy concentration at zero with a long thin right tail. Example: delinquency or inquiry counts, where most subjects are zero and a few are high.|shape
How do you test whether missingness is structural?|Cross-check the blanks against a companion column recording whether the event ever occurred. Example: time-since-last-event is blank for 99 percent of subjects whose event count is zero.|imputation
Why is a high missing rate not by itself a reason to drop a column?|The blanks may be an informative category rather than absent data. Example: 83 percent missing because only 17 percent of subjects ever had the event, which is precisely the signal.|imputation
How do you keep a conditionally-missing feature usable?|Split it into a binary occurred flag plus the value for those it applies to. Example: has-event alongside time-since-event, so "never" stays distinguishable from "long ago".|imputation
What are the two different problems a missing column can represent?|A rows problem, where some historical records lack it, or a column problem, where collection has stopped. Example: the first is ordinary missingness, the second makes the feature unusable going forward.|imputation
What is feature availability at inference time?|The requirement that a feature will actually be populated for the cases you intend to score. Example: a strongly predictive field no longer collected is worthless in production however clean the history looks.|pipeline
How does the timing of missingness change the decision?|Missing only in old records is tolerable, missing in recent records means the field is disappearing. Example: check when the blanks occur before choosing between imputing and dropping.|drift
How should a suspected bad value be confirmed?|Cross-check it against related columns to see whether the story holds together. Example: an implausible income checked against verification status, obligation ratio and requested amount.|quality
When does one strange value become a data quality decision?|Only when several independent signals agree it is impossible. Example: a round extreme value, unverified, and inconsistent with every related field.|quality
Why are suspiciously round extreme values a red flag?|They usually come from typing errors or placeholder codes rather than measurement. Example: an income of exactly 9000000, or a ratio of exactly 999.|quality
How do you sanity-check a ratio feature for impossible values?|Translate it back into what it claims about the real world. Example: an obligation ratio of 672 percent asserts payments of 20000 a month against an income of 3000.|quality
Whose job is removing bad rows, the model or the pipeline?|The pipeline. A model cannot tell that a value is fabricated; it fits whatever numbers it is handed. Example: an uncorrected extreme silently distorts the fitted relationship.|pipeline
How does training-time cleaning differ from inference-time validation?|Cleaning runs once over the training data, validation screens each incoming record in production. Example: separate systems solving separate problems.|pipeline
What are the three stages of pre-modelling analysis?|Univariate description, then feature-against-label checks, then multivariate assessment. Example: what is in the data, does it relate to the target, does it survive alongside everything else.|workflow
What does univariate mean in profiling?|One column examined alone, with no reference to any other variable, the label included. Example: the distribution, null rate and quantiles of a single field.|profiling
What does univariate mean in feature selection?|One predictor assessed against the target at a time, ignoring the other predictors. Example: a per-feature screening test, as opposed to a multivariate model.|screening
Why is the word univariate ambiguous?|Descriptive statistics counts variables in total, feature selection counts predictors only. Example: feature-versus-label is bivariate to a statistician and univariate to a screening routine.|screening
Which stage does feature-versus-label analysis belong to?|EDA, not profiling. Example: outcome rate by category is exploratory, a null rate is descriptive.|profiling
How do you restrict a profiling report to univariate output?|Disable correlations, interactions and cross-column missingness diagrams. Example: what remains is per-column statistics only.|profiling
How do you check a numeric feature against a binary label?|Correlate it with the 0/1 target, or compare its distribution across the two classes. Example: correlation against a binary outcome is the point-biserial correlation.|screening
How do you check a categorical feature against a binary label?|Compute the outcome rate and the row count within each category. Example: default rate by purpose, with counts so thin categories stay visible.|screening
Why report counts alongside per-group outcome rates?|A rate computed from a handful of rows is noise. Example: a category with 30 members can show almost any rate by chance.|screening
How strong is a correlation of 0.19 with a binary outcome?|Weak to moderate: a real population tendency, not a per-case prediction. Example: the strongest single feature in a credit dataset often sits below 0.2.|screening
What is an endogenous feature?|One produced by a decision process that already priced in the outcome risk. Example: a lender-assigned interest rate encodes the lender's own risk assessment rather than causing the risk.|bias
Why treat operator-assigned fields with care?|They are downstream of a human or model judgement, so they proxy someone else's assessment rather than the underlying phenomenon. Example: a price set by risk tier predicts risk almost by construction.|bias
What should a backwards bivariate result trigger?|A hunt for a confounder before the result is believed. Example: the unverified-income group defaulting least, because unverified cases are the small low-risk ones.|bias
What is non-random treatment assignment?|A process applied selectively on characteristics that also affect the outcome. Example: income is verified more often on large applications, so verified cases are larger and riskier before verification even happens.|bias
How do you test whether a group difference is composition rather than effect?|Compare the groups on the suspected confounders first. Example: check average amount and average price across verification groups before trusting the outcome-rate ordering.|bias
